CHAPTER XI.
A false balance is abomination to the Lord, But a just wait is his delight.
When pride cometh, then cometh shame, But with the lowly is wisdom.
The integrity of the upright shall guide them, But the perverseness of transgressors shall
destroy them. Riches profit not in the day of wrath, But righteousness delivereth from death.
The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way, But the wicked shall fall by his own
wickedness. The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them, But transgressors shall be taken
in their own naughtiness. When a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall perish, and the hope of
unjust men perisheth. The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his
stead. An hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his neighbor, but through knowledge shall the just be
delivered. When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth, and when the wicked perish,
there is shouting. By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted, but it is overthrown by the
mouth of the wicked. He that is void of wisdom despiseth his neighbor, but a man of understanding
holdeth his peace. A tale-bearer reveals secrets, but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth
the matter. Where no counsel is, the people fall, but in the multitude of counselors there is safety.
He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it, and he that hateth suretorship is sure. A gracious
woman retaineth honor, and strong men retain riches. The merciful man doeth good to his own soul,
but he that is cruel trebleth his own flesh. The wicked worketh a deceitful work, but to him that
righteousness shall be a sure reward. As righteousness tendeth to life, so he that pursueth evil pursueth
it to his own death. They that are of a foward heart are abomination to the Lord, but such as
are upright in their way are his delight. Though hand joined in hand, the wicked shall not be
punished, but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered. As a jewel of gold in a swine snout,
so is a fair woman which is without discretion. The desire of the righteous is only good,
but the expectation of the wicked is wrath. There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth,
and there is that withholdeth more than his meat, but it tendeth to poverty. The liberal soul shall
be made fat, and he that watereth shall be watered also himself. He that withholdeth corn,
the people shall curse him, but blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth it. He that
seeketh good procureth favor, but he that seeketh mischief it shall come unto him. He that trusteth
in his riches shall fall, but the righteous shall flourish as a branch. He that trebleth his own
house shall inherit the wind, and the fool shall be servant to the wise of heart. The fruit of the
is wise. Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth, much more the wicked in the sinner.